## i902 - Implementation Details

### Input Json format
 In order to execute ErgoScript the corresponding ErgoTree instance should be created.
 
 ErgoTree can be deserialized from bytes (see ErgoTreeDeserializer). 
 The bytes can be encoded into String and passed in Json. Alternatively, a script 
 can be parsed from text and compiled to ErgoTree using SigmaCompiler.compile method.
 
 The `compile` method have `env` argument (which can be empty) to inject named constants
 in the body of the resulting ErgoTree. This is often required, since not every type
 can be represented as literal in ErgoScript text.
 
 Depending on the ErgoTree representation (bytes, or text) input Json should have the
 corresponding fields.
 
 Each ErgoTree is executed in a context given by an instance of ErgoLikeContext class.
 
 Environment should be passed as the following Json, where each value is encoded 
 using `DataJsonEncoder` from sigmastate jar.
      
      ```
      { name1: value; ... nameN: value }
      ```
      
Here each value contains both type descriptor and data values as it is described 
[here](https://github.com/ScorexFoundation/sigmastate-interpreter/issues/583).

### Implementation steps:

- [ ] On the client side, create input data (in the form of Input Json Format) for script execution
      containing (ctx, script, env).
- [ ] send (ctx, script, env) as POST request to the API address `/script/executeToSigmaTree`
- [ ] on the server, read ctx using `ergoLikeContextEncoder` into the `ErgoLikeContext` object.
- [ ] on the server, compile (scriptString, env) to `ErgoTree` using `ScriptApiRoute.compileSource` 
- [ ] create `ErgoProvingInterpreter` (from ergo-wallet) and call `reduceToCrypto` method.
- [ ] serialize the result of the call in Json and return it as the result of the request.
      The result in general contains `SigmaBoolean` value, for which we don't have Json encoder.
      This have to be implemented as subtask
      
  - [ ] Implement Json Encoder/Decoder pair for SigmaBoolean values (aka sigma tree)

In general, this involves many subsystems, so you may need to dig along these steps.
Ping me with questions in comments below if necessary.

To understand which Json to send, for example, you can make ErgoLikeContext and serialize 
it to Json via ergoLikeContextEncoder.

NOTE: The work should be done using `v3.0.3` branch of Sigma.